---
layout: Writing
indent: true
permalink: /Ramanujan-Conjecture-S
feedformat: card
title: The Ramanujan Conjecture
---
<style>
    ol.custom {
        margin-top: -10px;
        margin-bottom: 20px;
        margin-left: -15px;
    }
    
    li {
        padding-top: 0px; 
        padding-bottom: 0px;
        margin-top: 0px;
        margin-bottom: 5px;
    }
}
</style>
$$ \newcommand{\AA}{\mathcal{A}} \newcommand{\CH}{\mathcal{H}} \newcommand{\CL}{\mathcal{L}} \newcommand{\CO}{\mathcal{O}} \newcommand{\FF}{\mathbb{F}} \newcommand{\NN}{\mathbb{N}} \newcommand{\CC}{\mathbb{C}} \newcommand{\QQ}{\mathbb{Q}} \newcommand{\QQ}{\mathbb{Q}} \newcommand{\RR}{\mathbb{R}} \newcommand{\ZZ}{\mathbb{Z}} $$
$$ \DeclareMathOperator{\an}{an} \DeclareMathOperator{\char}{char} \DeclareMathOperator{\colim}{colim} \DeclareMathOperator{\Hom}{Hom} \DeclareMathOperator{\Id}{Id} \DeclareMathOperator{\im}{im} \DeclareMathOperator{\Isom}{Isom} \DeclareMathOperator{\Gal}{Gal} \DeclareMathOperator{\GL}{GL} \DeclareMathOperator{\Ob}{Ob} \DeclareMathOperator{\Res}{Res} \DeclareMathOperator{\sh}{sh} \DeclareMathOperator{\SL}{SL} \DeclareMathOperator{\Spec}{Spec} \DeclareMathOperator{\Sym}{Sym} $$
<br>

**Abstract.** &nbsp; We discuss some of the main tools used by Deligne in proving the Ramanujan conjecture. These are notes from a talk, so I do not include most proofs. For a more comprehensive treatment see [\[1\]](#4-references).

## Table of Contents
1. [Modular Forms](#1-modular-forms)
2. [Ramanujan's Conjectures](#2-ramanujans-conjectures)
3. [Deligne's Proof](#3-delignes-proof)
4. [References](#4-references)


## 1. Modular Forms

&emsp; See Lang's book [\[3\]](#4-references) for the details of this section. Let 

$$ 
\CH 
= \{ z \in \CC \mid \text{im} \, z > 0 \}
$$

denote the upper half complex plane. The group $$ \SL_2(\ZZ) $$ acts on $$ \CH $$ via Möbius transformations

$$
\gamma
=
\begin{bmatrix}
a & b \\
c & d 
\end{bmatrix}
\to 
\frac{az + b}{cz + d}.
$$

We denote this action by $$ \gamma(z) $$.

&emsp; A holomorphic function $$ f \colon \CH \to \CC $$ is called a *modular form of weight $$ k $$* if for any $$ \gamma \in \SL_2(\ZZ) $$,
<ol type="a" class="custom" style="list-style-position: outside">
  <li>\( f(\gamma(z)) = (cz+d)^k f(z) \); and</li>
  
  <li>\( (cz+d)^{-k}f(\gamma(z)) \) remains bounded as \( \im(z) \) approaches infinity.</li>
</ol>
Condition (b) is equivalent to $$ f $$ having a $$ q $$-expansion at infinity. Additionally, we call $$ f $$ a *cusp form* if 

$$ 
\lim_{\im(z) \to \infty} (cz+d)^{-k} f(\gamma(z)) = 0.
$$

This is equivalent to $$ f $$ having constant term 0 in its $$ q $$ expansion. We denote the space of modular forms of weight $$ k $$ by $$ M_k $$, and of cusp forms by $$ S_k $$.

&emsp; We can consider modular forms as homogenious functions $$ F \colon \CL \to \CC $$ on complex lattices of degree $$ -k $$. Here, $$ \CL $$ is the free abelian group generated by complex lattices $$ \ZZ[a, b] $$ with $$ a, b \in \CC $$; and homogeneity means for $$ \lambda \in \CC^{\times} $$

$$
F(\lambda a, \lambda b)
= \lambda^{-k} F(a, b).
$$

The correspondence is given as follows. For $$ f $$ a modular form of weight $$ k $$, we set

$$ 
F(a, b) = b^{-k} F(a/b).
$$ 

Conversely, given such an $$ F $$, we set

$$ 
f(z) = F(z, 1).
$$ 

It is not hard to see these satisfy our desired properties.

&emsp; We define the $$ k $$th *Hecke operator* $$ T_k(N) \colon \CL \to \CL $$ by 

$$ 
T_k(n) F(L)
= n^{k-1} \sum_{[L : L'] = n} F(L'). 
$$

Using our correspondence, this is yields an operator $$ T_k(n) \colon M_k \to M_k $$. These satisfy 

$$ 
T_k(m) T_k(n) = T_k(mn) 
$$ 

for $$ m $$ and $$ n $$  coprime, and

$$
T_k(p^r) T_k(p)
= T_k(p^{r+1}) + p^{k-1} T_k(p^{r-1})
$$

for $$ p $$ prime.

&emsp; We say a modular form $$ f $$ of weight $$ k $$ is an *eigenform* if it is an eigenvector for every $$ T_k(n) $$. Suppose $$ f $$ has a $$ q $$-expansion 

$$ 
f(q) = \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} a_n q^n
$$ 

with $$ q= e^{2 \pi i z} $$. We can then attach a Dirichlet series to $$ f $$ by 

$$
D_f(s) = \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_n n^{-s}.
$$

If $$ f $$ is an eigenform this series factors.

**Theorem 1.** &nbsp; *Let $$ f $$ be an eigenform of weight $$ k $$. Then its Dirichlet series factors as*

$$
D_f(s) =
\prod_{p \text{ prime}} (1-a_p p^{-s} + p^{k-1-2s})^{-1}.
$$


## 2. Ramanujan's Conjectures

&emsp; Consider the space $$ S_{12} $$. It contains the cusp form

$$
\Delta(z)
= \sum_{n>0} \tau(n) q^n
= q \prod_{n > 0} (1-q^n)^{24},
$$ 

and since $$ S_{12} $$ is of dimension 1, $$ \Delta(z) $$ is an eigenform. The coefficient function $$ \tau \colon \NN \to \CC $$ is called the *Ramanujan tau function*. 

**Ramanujan Conjectures.** &nbsp; *The following should hold:*
<ol type="1" class="custom" style="list-style-position: outside">
  <li>\( \tau(m) \tau(n) = \tau(mn) \) for \( m \) and \( n \) coprime;</li>
  
  <li>\(\tau(p^r) \tau(p) = \tau(p^{r+1}) + p^{11} \tau(p^{r-1}) \) for \( p \) prime; and</li>
  
  <li>\( |\tau(p)| \leq 2 p^{11/2} \). </li>
</ol>

&emsp; These were conjectured in 1916. The first two relations were proved by Mordell in 1917 using Hecke operators. The third conjecture is what we are interested in and was proved by Deligne in 1971 (modulo the Weil conjectures). We will refer to this as "Ramanujan's conecture" in the sequel.


## 3. Deligne's Proof

#### Overview

&emsp; Let $$ D $$ denote the Dirichlet series associated to $$ \Delta $$. By [theorem 1](https://www.justinasher.me/Ramanujan-Conjecture-T1),

$$
D(s)
= \prod_{p \text{ prime}} H_p(p^{-s})^{-1},
$$

where 

$$
H_p(z)
= 1 - \tau(p) z + p^{11} z^2.
$$

**Lemma 3.1.** &nbsp; *Ramanujan's conjecture is true if the roots of $$ H_p $$ are of absolute value $$ p^{11/2} $$.* 

*Proof.* We see $$ H_p $$ has roots

$$
\alpha_{\pm}
= \frac{\tau(p) \pm \sqrt{\tau(p)^2 - 4 p^{11}}}{2}
$$

Hence, if

$$
2 p^{11/2} = \left| \tau(p) \pm \sqrt{\tau(p)^2 - 4 p^{11}} \right|,
$$

choosing our sign $$ \pm $$ appropriately shows $$ \vert \tau(p) \vert \leq 2 p^{11/2}. $$ $$ \blacksquare $$

&emsp; In order to calculate the absolute value of these roots, we are going to define a Frobenious action on a $$ \QQ_\ell $$ vector space $$ _1^{10} W_{\ell} $$. Deligne proves 

$$ 
H_p(z) = \det(1-FX; \, _1^{10} W_{\ell}),
$$

and hence the roots of $$ H_p $$ are the eigenvalues of this action. Our result will then follow from the Riemann hypothesis of the Weil conjectures. 


#### The Shimura Isomorphism

&emsp; Let $$ S $$ be a complex analytic space. An *elliptic curve* over $$ S $$ is a map $$ f \colon E \to S $$ with a section $$ e \colon S \to E $$, such that the fibers of $$ f $$ are elliptic curves with origin given by $$ e $$. 

&emsp; We say an isomorphism $$ R^1 f_* \underline{\ZZ} \to \underline{\ZZ}^2 $$ of sheaves on $$ S $$ is *permitted* if it induces -1 on the map 

$$ 
\bigwedge^2 R^1 f_* \underline{\ZZ} \to \bigwedge^2 \underline{\ZZ}^2.
$$

Let $$ \Isom^+(\RR^2, \CC) $$ be the collection of $$ \RR $$-vector space isomorphisms which reverse the orientation, and set 

$$ 
X = \CC^* \backslash \Isom^+(\RR^2, \CC). 
$$ 

We can identify $$ X $$ with the upper half plane $$ \CH $$ by considering where $$ e_1 = (1, 0) $$ and $$ e_2 = (0, 1) $$ are sent, i.e. $$ f(e_2)/f(e_1) $$.

**Proposition 3.2.** &nbsp; *$$ X $$ represents the functor which sends an analytic space $$ S $$ to the isomorphism classes of elliptic curves on $$ S $$, equipped with a permitted isomorphism $$ R^1 f_* \underline{\ZZ} \cong \underline{\ZZ}^2 $$.*

&emsp; The set of isomorphism classes of elliptic curves corresponds to complex lattices up to homothety, i.e. $$ \ZZ[a, b] \sim \ZZ[za, zb] $$ with $$ z \in \CC^{\times} $$, which correspond to elements in $$ X $$ (identify $$ X $$ with $$ \CH $$ and consider $$ b/a $$). We therefore construct a "universal elliptic curve" $$ f \colon E_X \to X $$ whose fibers consist of representatives from each isomorphism class of elliptic curves. 

&emsp; Let $$ \Gamma $$ be a discrete subgroup of $$ \SL_2(\ZZ) $$ without torsion elements such that $$ X/\Gamma $$ has finite volume (with respect to the Poincaré metric). We can identify $$ X/\Gamma $$ to a smooth projective curve $$ \overline{X/\Gamma} $$ minus a finite number of points.

&emsp; One of the main ideas of Deligne's paper is to use a cohomological description of cusp forms. We define a cusp form of weight $$ k $$ with respect to $$ \Gamma $$ by restricting to $$ \gamma \in \Gamma $$ in the definitions given in section 1, and we denote the resulting space $$ S_k(\Gamma) $$. 

&emsp; Alternatively, we see for $$ \gamma \in \SL_2(\ZZ) $$, 

$$
\frac{d \gamma(z)}{dz}
= (cz+d)^{-2}.
$$

Hence, the condition 

$$
f(\gamma(z)) = (cz+d)^k f(z) 
$$

is equivalent to 

$$
f(\gamma(z)) d\gamma(z)^k = f(z) dz^k.
$$

In other words, we are interested in the holomorphic differential forms $$ f(z) dz^k $$ of weight $$ k $$ invariant under $$ \Gamma $$. This can be achieved by taking sections of powers of the pushforward $$ \omega = f_* \Omega_{E_X/X} $$ and prolonging $$ \omega $$ to $$ \overline{X/\Gamma} $$. Deligne then identifies $$ \Omega_X^1 $$ with $$ \omega^2 $$ and, with additional proof, gets the following:

**Proposition 3.3.** &nbsp; *$$ S_{k+2}(\Gamma) $$ can be identified with $$ H^0(\overline{X/\Gamma}, \Omega_X^1 \otimes \omega^k) $$.*

<!---
&emsp; Set $$ \omega = f_* \Omega_{X/S} $$. We identify $$ R^1 f_* \underline{\RR} \otimes_{\RR} \CO_X $$ to the sheaf of relative de Rham cohomology of $$ E_X $$ over $$ X $$, and $$ \omega^{-1} $$ to $$ R^1 f_* \CO_X $$ by Poincaré duality. Then the Hodge decomposition

$$
H^1(Z) \cong H^0(Z, \Omega^1_Z) \oplus H^1(Z, \CO_Z)
$$

yields a short exact sequence 

$$
0 \to \omega \to R^1 f_* \underline{\RR} \otimes_{\RR} \CO_X \to \omega^{-1} \to 0.
$$

&emsp; Set $$ U = R^1 f_* \underline{\RR} $$ and denote $$ U^k $$ its $$ k $$th symmetric power.

&emsp; The de Rham resolution of $$ U \otimes_{\RR} \CC $$,

$$
\xymatrix{ 
    0 \ar[r] & U \otimes_{\RR} \CC \ar[r] & U \otimes_{\RR} \CO_X \ar[r]^-d & U \otimes_{\RR} \Omega_X^1 \ar[r] & 0,
}
$$

induces a map 

$$
\delta \colon H^0(X, U^k \otimes \Omega^1) \to H^1(X, U^k \otimes \CC).
$$

Since $$  $$ is a complex space 
-->

&emsp; Using this theorem, we can then identify cusp forms with the first reduced cohomology group of the symmetric power of a local system on $$ \overline{X/\Gamma} $$ tensored over $$ \CC $$. We will not explicitely construct this map since we will only be using its existence.

**Theorem (Shimura Isomorphism).** &nbsp; *There exists an isomorphism*

<!--
$$
\xymatrix{ 
    H^0(\overline{X/\Gamma}, \, \Omega^1 \otimes \omega^k) \oplus \overline{H^0(\overline{X/\Gamma}, \, \Omega^1 \otimes \omega^k)} \ar@{^{(}->}[d] \ar[r]^-\sh 
    & \widetilde{H}^1(\overline{X/\Gamma}, \, \Sym^k(R^1 f_* \underline{\ZZ})) \otimes_{\ZZ} \CC \ar@{^{(}->}[d] \\
    H^0(X/\Gamma, \, \Omega^1 \otimes \omega^k) \oplus \overline{H^0(X/\Gamma, \, \Omega^1 \otimes \omega^k)}  \ar[r]^-{\sh_0} 
    & \widetilde{H}^1(X/\Gamma, \, \Sym^k(R^1 f_* \underline{\ZZ})) \otimes_{\ZZ} \CC
} 
$$

*In particular,*
-->

$$
S_{k+2}(\Gamma) \oplus \overline{S_{k+2}(\Gamma)} \cong \widetilde{H}^1(\overline{X/\Gamma}, \, \Sym^k(R^1 f_* \underline{\ZZ})) \otimes_{\ZZ} \CC.
$$

#### Full Level $$ n $$ Structures

&emsp; We would like to emulate [proposition 3.2](https://www.justinasher.me/Ramanujan-Conjecture-P3:2) in the case of schemes. An *elliptic curve* over a scheme $$ S $$ is a proper smooth morphism $$ f \colon E \to S $$ whose fibers are geometrically connected curves of genus 1, equipped with a section $$ e \colon S \to E $$. In what follows, we will assume that $$ S $$ is of characteristic 0, meaning each $$ s \in S $$ satisfies $$ \char k(s) = 0 $$. 

<!-- Likewise, set 

$$
\underline{\ZZ}_{\ell} = \colim_r \underline{\ZZ/(\ell^r)}, \quad 
\underline{\hat{\ZZ}} = (\underline{\ZZ}_{\ell}).
$$

&emsp; It can be shown that an elliptic curve over $$ S $$ is a group scheme, and hence we define $$ E_n $$ to be the kernel of the multiply-by-$$ n $$ endomorphism of $$ E $$. For $$ \ell $$ prime, we define the $$ \ell $$ th *Tate module* as the colimit

$$ 
T_{\ell}(E) = \colim_r E_{\ell^r},
$$

which is a $$ \ZZ_{\ell} $$ sheaf. We can think of $$ T_{\ell}(E) $$ as the "first étale homology group $$ H_1(E, \underline{\ZZ}_{\ell}) $$". Thus, bundling our Tate modules for each prime $$ \ell $$ yields a $$ \hat{\ZZ} $$ sheaf $$ T_f(E) $$.
--> 

&emsp; Let $$ \Gamma(n) $$ be the elements $$ \gamma \in \SL_2(\ZZ) $$ such that $$ \gamma \equiv \Id $$ modulo $$ n $$, i.e.

$$
\begin{bmatrix}
a & b \\
c & d
\end{bmatrix}
\equiv
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 0 \\
0 & 1
\end{bmatrix}
\quad \text{modulo } n
$$

or $$ a \equiv d \equiv 1 $$ and $$ b \equiv c \equiv 0 $$ modulo $$ n $$. Define $$ M_n $$ to be $$ X/\Gamma(n) $$ considered as a complex algebraic variety; and let $$ M_n^{\an} $$ be $$ X/\Gamma(n) $$ considered as a complex analytic space.

**Proposition 3.4.** &nbsp; *For $$ n \geq 3 $$, $$ M_n $$ (resp. $$ M_n^{\an} $$) represents the functor which sends a scheme $$ S $$ of characteristic 0 (resp. an analytic space) to the isomorphism classes of elliptic curves $$ E $$ on $$ S $$, equipped with an isomorphism $$ \alpha \colon E_n \to (\ZZ/n\ZZ)^2 $$.*

&emsp; Write $$ f_n \colon E \to M_n $$ for the universal elliptic curve on $$ M_n $$ (or $$ M_n^{\an} $$) for $$ n \geq 3 $$. Fix an algebraic closure $$ \overline{\QQ} $$ of $$ \QQ $$. We define 

$$
\begin{aligned}
_n^k W & = \widetilde{H}^1(M_n^{\an}, \, \Sym^k(R^1 f_{n*}(\underline{\QQ}))) \\
_n^k W_{\ell} & = \widetilde{H}^1(M_n \otimes \overline{\QQ}, \, \Sym^k(R^1 f_{n*}(\underline{\QQ}_{\ell}))),
\end{aligned}
$$

and 

$$
^kW = \lim_{n \to} {_n^k W}, \qquad 
{^k W_{\ell}} = \lim_{n \to} {_n^k W_{\ell}},
$$

which satisfy $$ {^k W_{\ell}} = {^k W} \otimes \QQ_{\ell} $$.

&emsp; Setting $$ ^kW_{\infty} = {^k W} \otimes \CC $$, the Shimura isomorphism implies

$$
\begin{aligned}
^k W_{\infty} & = \lim_{n \to} S_{k+2}(\overline{M_n^{\an}}) \oplus \overline{S_{k+2}(\overline{M_n^{\an}})}.
\end{aligned}
$$

Defining $$ _1^k W = {_n^k W^{\GL_2(\ZZ/n\ZZ)}} $$, Deligne shows

$$
_1^k W_{\infty}
= _1^k W \otimes \CC
\cong S_{k+2} \oplus \overline{S_{k+2}}.
$$

Here, the notation means we are considering the elements of $$ ^k_n W $$ invariant under the $$ \GL_2(\ZZ/n\ZZ) $$.

**Lemma 3.5.** &nbsp; *We have $$ _1^k W_{\infty} \cong S_{k+2} \oplus \overline{S_{k+2}} $$.*


#### Frobenious and Verschiebung

&emsp; Fix a pair $$ (E, \alpha) $$ as in [proposition 3.4](https://www.justinasher.me/Ramanujan-Conjecture-P3:4), and let $$ F \colon E \to E^{(p)} $$ denote the (classical) Frobenious. Then we can define a corresponding pair $$ (E^{(p)}, \alpha^{(p)}) $$ via the diagram over $$ M_n \otimes \FF_p $$

$$
\xymatrix{
& (\ZZ/n\ZZ)^2 & \\
E_n \ar[ru]^{\alpha} \ar[rr] & & E_n^{(p)} \ar[lu]_{\alpha^{(p)}} \\
E \ar[u] \ar[rr]^{F} & & E^{(p)} \ar[u]
}
$$

This defines an endomorphism of

$$
\widetilde{H}^1(M_n \otimes \overline{\FF}_p, \Sym^k(R^1 f_{n*} \underline{\ZZ}_{\ell}))
$$

by acting on our constant sheaf $$ \underline{\ZZ}_{\ell} $$.

&emsp; We likewise have a diagram

$$
\xymatrix{
& (\ZZ/n\ZZ)^2 & \\
E_n^{(p)} \ar[ru]^{p \alpha^{(p)}} \ar[rr] & & E_n \ar[lu]_{\alpha} \\
E^{(p)} \ar[u] \ar[rr]^{V} & & E \ar[u]
}
$$

which defines the transpose of the Frobenious, the Vershiebung, with respect to an abstracted Peterson inner product.

&emsp; Finally, we define the Hecke operator $$ T_p $$ acting on $$ _1^k W_{\infty} $$ by the coset of 

$$
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 0 \\
0 & p^{-1}
\end{bmatrix}
$$

in $$ \GL_2(\ZZ_p) \backslash \GL_2(\QQ_p)/\GL_2(\ZZ_p) $$. Likewise define $$ R_p $$ to be the coset of 

$$
\begin{bmatrix}
p^{-1} & 0 \\
0 & p^{-1}
\end{bmatrix}.
$$

Setting $$ I_p \colon M_n \to M_n $$ to be the functor $$ (E, \alpha) \to (E, \alpha/p) $$, Deligne proved the following:

**Proposition 3.6.** &nbsp; *$$ F $$ is the inverse of the Frobenious from the action of $$ \Gal(\overline{\FF}_p/\FF_p) $$ on*

$$
\widetilde{H}^1(M_n \otimes \overline{\FF}_p, \Sym^k(R^1 f_{n*} \underline{\ZZ}_{\ell})).
$$

*Over $$ \FF_p $$, we have $$ T_p = F + I_p^* V $$ and $$ FV = VF = p^{k+1} $$.*

&emsp; From this, we get the following theorem.

**Theorem 3.7.** &nbsp; *Let $$ K_{n, \ell} $$ be the largest unramified extension of $$ \overline{\QQ} $$ away from $$ n $$ and $$ \ell $$, $$ \varphi_p $$ a relative Frobenious to $$ p $$ in $$ \Gal(K_{n, \ell}/\QQ) $$, $$ F $$ the endomorphism $$ \varphi_p^{-1} $$ of $$ ^k_n W_{\ell} $$, and $$ V $$ the transpose of $$ F $$. Then*

$$
T_p = F + I_p^* V, \qquad FV = p^{k+1},
$$

$$
1 - T_p + p R_p X^2 = (1-FX)(1+I_p^*VX).
$$


#### Applying the Riemann Hypothesis

&emsp; Deligne uses the $$ j $$-invariant and Abyankhar's lemma to compactify $$ M_n $$ into a space $$ M_n^* $$ which is projective and smooth over $$ \Spec(\ZZ[1/n]) $$, as $$ M_n $$ is not. With a bit of proof, this allows us to apply the Riemann hypothesis to get the following:

**Theorem 3.8.** &nbsp; *The eigenvalues of the Frobenious $$ F $$ acting on $$ ^k_n W_{\ell} $$ are algebraic integers of absolute value $$ p^{(k+1)/2} $$.*

&emsp; Since $$ I_p^* $$ induces the identity on $$ _1^k W_{\ell} $$, we have 

$$
1 - T_p X + p^{k+1} X^2 = (1-FX)(1-VX);
$$

and because $$ F $$ and $$ V $$ are transposes, 

$$
\det(1-FX; \, {_1^k W_{\ell}}) = \det(1-VX; \, {_1^k W_{\ell}}).
$$ 

Thus,

$$
\det(1-T_pX+p^{k+1}X^2; \, {_1^k W_{\ell}})
= \det(1-FX; \, {_1^k W_{\ell}})^2.
$$

&nbsp; Since $$ T_p $$ action on $$ _n^k W_{\ell} $$ is induced by its action on $$ _n^k W_{\infty} $$, we can apply [lemma 3.5](https://www.justinasher.me/Ramanujan-Conjecture-L3:5) to get

$$
\det(1-T_pX +p^{k+1}X^2; \, {_1^k W_{\ell}}) = \det(1-T_pX+p^{k+1}X^2; \, S_{k+2})^2,
$$

and hence 

$$
\det(1-T_pX+p^{k+1}X^2; \, S_{k+2})
= \det(1-FX; \, {_1^k W_{\ell}}).
$$

&emsp; In the case $$ k = 10 $$, because $$ S_{12} $$ is of dimension 1, this tells us

$$
H_p(X) = \det(1-FX; \, {_1^{10} W_{\ell}}).
$$

Applying [theorem 3.8](https://www.justinasher.me/Ramanujan-Conjecture-T3:8) completes Deligne's proof of the Ramanujan conjecture. Q.E.D.

## 4. References

1. Pierre Deligne. "Formes modulaires et représentations $$ l $$-adiques". *Séminaire Bourbaki*, no. 355 (1968–1969).
2. Pierre Deligne. "La conjecture de Weil: I". *Publications Mathématiques de l'IHÉS*, Volume 43 (1974), pp. 273-307. [Link](http://www.numdam.org/item/PMIHES_1974__43__273_0/)
3. Serge Lang, *Introduction to modular forms*, Springer-Verlag, 1976.
4. Jean-Pierre Serre, *A course in arithmetic*, Springer-Verlag, 1973.
