---
layout: Writing
indent: true
permalink: /Hecke-algebras
feedformat: card
title: Hecke algebras
---
<style>
    ol.custom {
        margin-top: -10px;
        margin-bottom: 20px;
        margin-left: -15px;
    }
    
    li {
        padding-top: 0px; 
        padding-bottom: 0px;
        margin-top: 0px;
        margin-bottom: 5px;
    }
}
</style>
<br>

**Abstract.** &nbsp; We explain how different definitions of the Hecke algebra relate to each other.

## Table of Contents
1. [The classical Hecke algebra](#1-the-classical-hecke-operators)



## 1. The classical Hecke algebra


&emsp; Let $ k $ be a field, and let $ E $ be a $ k $-variety. The following are equivalent:

1.  $ E $ is an abelian variety of dimension 1 over $ k $;

2.  $ E $ is a smooth, projective curve of genus one with a choice of origin;

we refer to such $ E $ as being *elliptic*.


&emsp; We call a discrete additive subgroup $ L $ of $ k $ a *lattice*. There exists an additive isomorphism of $ L $ with $ \mathbb{Z}^n $; we call $ n $ the *rank* of our lattice. 


&emsp; Assume $ L $ is a complex lattice of rank 2, which we write 

$$
L = \left< w_1, w_2 \right> = \left< a_1 w_1 + a_2 w_2 \mid a_i \in \mathbb{Z} \right>
$$

with $ w_2 / w_1 \in \mathcal{H} $ and $ \mathcal{H} $ the upper-half plane. The quotient $ \mathbb{C}/L $ is an abelian variety of dimension 1 over $ \mathbb{C} $; hence, an elliptic curve. Every complex elliptic curve arises in this manner, and there is a bijection between isomorphism classes of elliptic curves and lattices up to homothety. (This is not true for higher dimensional complex abelian varieties.) In the sequel, we let $ \mathcal{L} $ denote the free abelian group generated by complex lattices of rank 2 (i.e. elliptic curves).


&emsp; Elements of the modular group $ \gamma \in \text{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z}) $ act on $ \mathcal{H} $ by fractional linear transformations; meaning for $ z \in \mathcal{H} $ and

$$
\gamma = \begin{bmatrix} a & b \\ c & d \end{bmatrix}, \text{ we put }
\gamma(z) = \frac{az + b}{cz + d}.
$$


&emsp; A holomorphic function $ f \colon \mathcal{H} \to \mathbb{C} $ is called a *modular form of weight $ k $* if, for any $ \gamma \in \text{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z}) $, 

$$ 
f(\gamma(z)) = (cz+d)^k f(z),
$$

and $ f(z) $ remains bounded as $ \text{im}(z) $ approaches infinity. Equivalently, we define modular forms as homogeneous functions $ F \colon \mathcal{L} \to \mathbb{C} $ of degree $ -k $; meaning, for $ \lambda \in \mathbb{C}^{\times} $,

$$
F(\lambda w_1, \lambda w_2)
= \lambda^{-k} F(w_1, w_2).
$$

Indeed, given a modular form $ f $ of weight $ k $, we put

$$ 
F(a, b) = b^{-k} F(a/b),
$$ 

and given a homogeneous function $ F $ of weight $ -k $, we put

$$ 
f(z) = F(z, 1).
$$ 

This correspondence is bijective, and we denote our spaces of modular forms by $ f \in M_k $ and $ F \in M_k^{\mathcal{L}} $; put $ M_* = \bigoplus M_k $ and $ M_*^{\mathcal{L}} = \bigoplus M_k^{\mathcal{L}} $. We define the Hecke algebra on these spaces as follows.


&emsp; (*$ \mathcal{H} $ point de vue*) Put $ \Gamma = \text{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z}) $. Define $ H_k $ to be the free abelian group with basis elements double cosets $ \Gamma \alpha \Gamma $ where $ \alpha \in M_2^+(\mathbb{Z}) $, the plus meaning positive determinant. Take coset decompositions 

$$ 
x = \Gamma \alpha \Gamma = \coprod_{i=1}^A \Gamma \alpha_i, 
\qquad y = \Gamma \beta \Gamma = \coprod_{j=1}^B \Gamma \beta_j, 
$$

and $ z = \Gamma \xi \Gamma $, then set 

$$
x \cdot y
= \sum_{z \subseteq \Gamma \alpha \Gamma \beta \Gamma} m(x \cdot y, z) z
$$

(summing over all cosets $ z $ contained in $ \Gamma \alpha \Gamma \beta \Gamma $), where 

$$
m(x \cdot y, z)
= \text{Card}\{ (i, j) \mid \Gamma \alpha_i \beta_j = \Gamma \zeta \};
$$

this product is independent of our coset representatives, and it is associative and commutative; we extend it $ \mathbb{Z} $-linearly to define multiplication on $ H $. (Observe multiplication here is a type of convolution.) We call $ H $ the *Hecke algebra*. 


&emsp; $ H $ can be considered a subalgebra of $ \text{End}(M_*) $, and hence $ M $ a left $  H $-module, by the action on $ f \in M_k $

$$
\Gamma \alpha \Gamma \cdot f(z)
= \det(\alpha)^{k-1} \sum_{i=1}^A j(\alpha_i, z)^{-k} f(\alpha_i(z)),
$$

We define the $ n $-th *Hecke operator* as the coset

$$
T_n = 
\Gamma
\begin{bmatrix} 
    n & 0 \\
    0 & 1
\end{bmatrix}
\Gamma
$$

$ H $ is generated by the $ T_n $.


&emsp; (*Measure point de vue*) Let 

$$
\varphi \colon \text{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z}) \backslash \text{M}_2^+(\mathbb{Z}) / \text{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z}) \to \mathbb{C} 
$$

be a continuous function with compact support; assuming the left hand side is equipped with the discrete topology, this reduces to saying $ f $ is supported on finitely many cosets. Write $ H^{\mathcal{M}} $ for the set of all such $ \varphi $. Let multiplication on $ H^{\mathcal{M}} $ be the convolution

$$
(\varphi_1 \ast \varphi_2)(x) 
= \int_{\text{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z}) \backslash \text{M}_2^+(\mathbb{Z}) / \text{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z})} \varphi_1(y) \varphi_2(y^{-1} x) dy.
$$

We call $ H^{\mathcal{M}} $ the *Hecke algebra*. 


&emsp; (*Lattice point de vue*) We define the $ n $-th *Hecke operator* $ T_n^{\mathcal{L}} \in \text{End}(M_k^{\mathcal{L}}) $ by

$$ 
T_n^{\mathcal{L}} F(L)
= n^{k-1} \sum_{[L : L'] = n} F(L');
$$

note that again the action depends on the weight $ -k $ of $ F $. We call the subalgebra $ H^{\mathcal{L}} $ of $ \text{End} (M^{\mathcal{L}}_{\ast}) $ generated by the $ T_n^{\mathcal{L}} $ the *Hecke algebra*.

 
**Theorem 1.** &nbsp; $ T_n f(z) = T_n^{\mathcal{L}} F(z, 1) $. 


&emsp; Put $ L = \left< z, 1 \right> $. Any index $ n $ sublattice $ L' $ of $ L $ is given by a $ \mathbb{Z} $-linear transformation $ M \colon L \to L' $ with $ \det M = n $. Since $$ \text{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z}) $$ is the kernel of the determinant, we have a bijection between isomorphism classes of index $ n $ sublattices and $$ M_n^+(\mathbb{Z})/\text{SL}_2(\mathbb{Z}) $$. Writing $ \Gamma T_n \Gamma = \coprod_{i=1}^N \Gamma t_i $, it then follows immediately that

$$
T_n f(z) = n^{k-1} \sum_{i=1}^N f(t_i(z)) = n^{k-1} \sum_{[L : L'] = n} F(L) = T_n^{\mathcal{L}} F(L).
$$

Q.E.D.


## 2. Hecke algebras for td groups


&emsp; Let $ G $ be a topological group of (totally disconnected) td-type; this means every neighborhood of 1 contains a compact open subgroup. Let $ K $ be any compact open subgroup of $ G $, and $ f \colon G \to \mathbb{C} $ 



## 4. References

1. 
